2016-11-07-raspberry-pi-talking-led.md, before:

---
title: Talking LED
tags: [raspberrypi]
layout: post
---

I'm working with a Raspberry Pi for a project. For my "Hello World"
project, _Raspberry Pi edition_, I set up a LED and programmed it to
blink.  For a part of the main project, I had the Raspberry Pi read
words in the lovely robot voice of `espeak`. 

I thought what so many people before me have: Can I put these two
together? Can I make that little LED blink with the words?


## Totally

The files are generated using Linux's text-to-speech program,
`espeak`. Something like this:

{% highlight bash %}
echo "This American Life" | espeak -w tal.wav
{% endhighlight %}

I want to blink a LED along with the audio.

The first issue is splitting the audio output between the speakers and
my light-blinking program.

## Note to self, the tee command is cool

My first idea involved `tee`, a nifty UNIX command that I never
remember when I need it, but do remember when I don't.

`tee` can be used to split a command's output into two outputs.  In
this context, I could use `tee` to send `espeak`'s data to both `aplay`
and my visualizer.

But since I can compute the visuals faster than the audio plays, and
`tee` would send the file all at once to both `aplay` and the
visualizer, the audio and visuals would be out of sync. Uncool!

## PyAudio

At this point, I searched for prior work on the internet (a benefit of
being unoriginal!) It led me to a strategy involving Python's built-in
[`wave`](https://docs.python.org/2/library/wave.html), which can read
WAV files, and
[`PyAudio`](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/), which can
play audio through Python. PyAudio provided a nice
[starter script](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/) on its
site, that provided most of the code for this project.

The basic strategy is: 

1. Read a part of the WAV file using `wave`.
2. Process that data to determine how bright to make the LED.
3. Update the brightness of the LED.
4. Pass the data to PyAudio to play.

Or in code, the gist is (based on that lovely
[starter script](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/))

{% highlight python %}
CHUNK = 1024
wf = wave.open(...)  # WAV file
stream = ...  # Set up PyAudio's output stream

data = wf.readframes(CHUNK)  # Read a part of the WAV file
while data != '':
    do_something_with_the_light(data)  # Make the LED do something
    stream.write(data)  # Play it (blocking)
    data = wf.readframes(CHUNK)  # Read the next part of the file
{% endhighlight %}

### An aside: Chunk size

If the `CHUNK` number is too small, the inside of the while loop takes
longer than the sound part I read, and it sounds gross and choppy. If
the `CHUNK` number is too big, I get fewer points where the visuals
and audio are in sync.

### Do something with the light

I found an example online that converted the data from `wave` into a
numpy array.

{% highlight python %}
data = wf.readframes(CHUNK)
...
def do_something_with_the_light(data):
    array = np.fromstring(data, dtype=width)
    ...
{% endhighlight %}

And now I had numbers!

## Meaningless numbers

I got this far without having to remember or learn anything about
signals or audio.  Now I had this meaningless array of numbers, which
I wasn't even sure if I had decoded properly. I took a step back and
learned a few things.

I started by trying to make sense of PyAudio stream initialization
arguments, _format_ and _rate_.

{% highlight python %}
stream = p.open(format=p.get_format_from_width(wf.getsampwidth()),  # ???
                channels=wf.getnchannels(),  # mono or stereo
                rate=wf.getframerate(),  # ???
                output=True)
{% endhighlight %}


### Recall physics, and then digitize it

Sound is a vibration and can be represented by a waveform. In one
version, the x-axis is time. The amplitude of the wave is how loud it
is. I need some way to measure this to determine how bright to make
the LED.


_Artist's interpretation of sine wave:_

![sine wave](/assets/2016-11-07-squiggle.png)

WAV files use a bitstream to represent a waveform. A bitstream is, uh,
a stream of bits, like `01010010`. WAV uses a strategy to represent
the wiggly waves in bits, and I want to turn it back into a waveform
in order to access its amplitude.


#### Part 1: Frames, a sample of an amplitude

One way to represent audio signals is
[pulse-code modulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulse-code_modulation),
where you sample the value of the amplitude at uniform intervals. I
imagine it as something like this:

![equally spaced samples](/assets/2016-11-07-pixels.png)

There's only one highlighted point per column, and the point might be
rounded up or down (I think this is quantization). Then I can
represent this whole waveform in a list of numbers, like
`[4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, 4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, 4, 1, 0, 2]`

In Python's `wave`, each amplitude sample, like `4`, is called a frame. 

In the code, `wf.readframes(1024)` gives me the amplitude of
1,024 samples.  For my project, I want to average the amplitudes of
these samples to determine the brightness. So close!

First though, I need to make sense of the raw data of
`wf.readframes(1024)`.

### Part 2: Sample width, how each sample is represented

Pulse-code modulation WAV represents waves as a list of numbers in
a stream of bits. The amplitude samples above looked like
`[4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, ...]`. 

Let's say I want to send you these numbers as a bitstream. First, I'd
change `[4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, ...]` to bits, like `100 001 000 010 110 111`, and I'd
ditch the spaces and get something like `100001000010110111`. 

When you start getting the stream of bits, `100001000010110111`, you'd want to
know if you should read it as
`100001000 010110111` or
`100 001 000 010 110 111` or something else.
So I'd tell you ahead of time that each number
is represented by 3 bits. Similarly in `wave`, `wf.getsampwidth()` tells me the sample width in bytes.

To be honest, I still don't completely understand this part, because
I'm not sure what those bytes represented. Are they signed,
unsigned, or a float? Is this noted in the file, or in the
specification? Instead of looking into it too much, I peaked at how
PyAudio did it.

PyAudio also needs to know this information to build its stream. In
the demo code, it uses `p.get_format_from_width(wf.getsampwidth())` to
get a [PortAudio format](http://portaudio.com/docs/v19-doxydocs/portaudio_8h.html#a4582d93c2c2e60e12be3d74c5fe00b96),
like `pyaudio.paInt16`. I cheated a bit, and added a mapping based on this:

{% highlight python %}
if pyaudio_format == pyaudio.paInt16:
    width = np.int16
else:
    sys.exit("add a mapping from this pyaudio format to numpy type")
...
np.fromstring(data, dtype=width)
{% endhighlight %}


### Part 3 (bonus): Rate, or how wide the uniform intervals are

At this point, I actually know enough to make my light blink. But for
completeness, let's talk about rate.

In Part 1, I got a list of amplitude measurements across 1,024
points. WAV doesn't store the x-values of all these points. Instead, it
notes the number of samples per second, or how wide those uniform
intervals are.

`wave` gives the number of samples per second with `wf.getframerate()`. My file was 22050.

# Empowered with knowledge, onward I go!

Back to my function:
{% highlight python %}
def do_something_with_the_light(chunk_data):
  data = np.fromstring(chunk_data, dtype=width)
{% endhighlight %}


Now I knew what data I was getting. It represented the sound with
1,024 int16 numbers that represented the amplitude of the waveform.
In the real world, it represented approximately 1/20th (or 1024/22050)
of a second of sound.

So I should be able to graph it!

![Graph of robot voice sound wave](/assets/2016-11-07-real.png)

Neat! 

The last step is turning that wiggly line into how bright the LED
should be when playing this sound bite. A higher amplitude means the
sound was louder. I'm sure I could spend a lot of time on this (how do
humans perceive differences in loudness and brightness?), but instead,
I took the mean of the absolute value and scaled it to a percent for
the LED.

And it kind of looked okay! The light blinked along with the sound!

And I learned a tiny, tiny bit about audio file formats.


## See Also
* [The code](https://github.com/jessstringham/raspberrypi/blob/master/talking_led.py)
* [PyAudio](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/) and [PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com)
* This is a more legit: [3D Spectrum Analyser](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vn39txtVIHc)
* Speaking of codecs, here's a cool post about [H.264](https://sidbala.com/h-264-is-magic/)

Commit message:

Add display images and fix whitespace

2016-11-07-raspberry-pi-talking-led.md, after:

---
title: Talking LED
tags: [raspberrypi]
layout: post
display_image: /assets/2016-11-07-pixels.png
---

I'm working with a Raspberry Pi for a project. For my "Hello World"
project, _Raspberry Pi edition_, I set up a LED and programmed it to
blink.  For a part of the main project, I had the Raspberry Pi read
words in the lovely robot voice of `espeak`.

I thought what so many people before me have: Can I put these two
together? Can I make that little LED blink with the words?


## Totally

The files are generated using Linux's text-to-speech program,
`espeak`. Something like this:

{% highlight bash %}
echo "This American Life" | espeak -w tal.wav
{% endhighlight %}

I want to blink a LED along with the audio.

The first issue is splitting the audio output between the speakers and
my light-blinking program.

## Note to self, the tee command is cool

My first idea involved `tee`, a nifty UNIX command that I never
remember when I need it, but do remember when I don't.

`tee` can be used to split a command's output into two outputs.  In
this context, I could use `tee` to send `espeak`'s data to both `aplay`
and my visualizer.

But since I can compute the visuals faster than the audio plays, and
`tee` would send the file all at once to both `aplay` and the
visualizer, the audio and visuals would be out of sync. Uncool!

## PyAudio

At this point, I searched for prior work on the internet (a benefit of
being unoriginal!) It led me to a strategy involving Python's built-in
[`wave`](https://docs.python.org/2/library/wave.html), which can read
WAV files, and
[`PyAudio`](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/), which can
play audio through Python. PyAudio provided a nice
[starter script](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/) on its
site, that provided most of the code for this project.

The basic strategy is:

1. Read a part of the WAV file using `wave`.
2. Process that data to determine how bright to make the LED.
3. Update the brightness of the LED.
4. Pass the data to PyAudio to play.

Or in code, the gist is (based on that lovely
[starter script](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/))

{% highlight python %}
CHUNK = 1024
wf = wave.open(...)  # WAV file
stream = ...  # Set up PyAudio's output stream

data = wf.readframes(CHUNK)  # Read a part of the WAV file
while data != '':
    do_something_with_the_light(data)  # Make the LED do something
    stream.write(data)  # Play it (blocking)
    data = wf.readframes(CHUNK)  # Read the next part of the file
{% endhighlight %}

### An aside: Chunk size

If the `CHUNK` number is too small, the inside of the while loop takes
longer than the sound part I read, and it sounds gross and choppy. If
the `CHUNK` number is too big, I get fewer points where the visuals
and audio are in sync.

### Do something with the light

I found an example online that converted the data from `wave` into a
numpy array.

{% highlight python %}
data = wf.readframes(CHUNK)
...
def do_something_with_the_light(data):
    array = np.fromstring(data, dtype=width)
    ...
{% endhighlight %}

And now I had numbers!

## Meaningless numbers

I got this far without having to remember or learn anything about
signals or audio.  Now I had this meaningless array of numbers, which
I wasn't even sure if I had decoded properly. I took a step back and
learned a few things.

I started by trying to make sense of PyAudio stream initialization
arguments, _format_ and _rate_.

{% highlight python %}
stream = p.open(format=p.get_format_from_width(wf.getsampwidth()),  # ???
                channels=wf.getnchannels(),  # mono or stereo
                rate=wf.getframerate(),  # ???
                output=True)
{% endhighlight %}


### Recall physics, and then digitize it

Sound is a vibration and can be represented by a waveform. In one
version, the x-axis is time. The amplitude of the wave is how loud it
is. I need some way to measure this to determine how bright to make
the LED.


_Artist's interpretation of sine wave:_

![sine wave](/assets/2016-11-07-squiggle.png)

WAV files use a bitstream to represent a waveform. A bitstream is, uh,
a stream of bits, like `01010010`. WAV uses a strategy to represent
the wiggly waves in bits, and I want to turn it back into a waveform
in order to access its amplitude.


#### Part 1: Frames, a sample of an amplitude

One way to represent audio signals is
[pulse-code modulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulse-code_modulation),
where you sample the value of the amplitude at uniform intervals. I
imagine it as something like this:

![equally spaced samples](/assets/2016-11-07-pixels.png)

There's only one highlighted point per column, and the point might be
rounded up or down (I think this is quantization). Then I can
represent this whole waveform in a list of numbers, like
`[4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, 4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, 4, 1, 0, 2]`

In Python's `wave`, each amplitude sample, like `4`, is called a frame.

In the code, `wf.readframes(1024)` gives me the amplitude of
1,024 samples.  For my project, I want to average the amplitudes of
these samples to determine the brightness. So close!

First though, I need to make sense of the raw data of
`wf.readframes(1024)`.

### Part 2: Sample width, how each sample is represented

Pulse-code modulation WAV represents waves as a list of numbers in
a stream of bits. The amplitude samples above looked like
`[4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, ...]`.

Let's say I want to send you these numbers as a bitstream. First, I'd
change `[4, 1, 0, 2, 6, 7, ...]` to bits, like `100 001 000 010 110 111`, and I'd
ditch the spaces and get something like `100001000010110111`.

When you start getting the stream of bits, `100001000010110111`, you'd want to
know if you should read it as
`100001000 010110111` or
`100 001 000 010 110 111` or something else.
So I'd tell you ahead of time that each number
is represented by 3 bits. Similarly in `wave`, `wf.getsampwidth()` tells me the sample width in bytes.

To be honest, I still don't completely understand this part, because
I'm not sure what those bytes represented. Are they signed,
unsigned, or a float? Is this noted in the file, or in the
specification? Instead of looking into it too much, I peaked at how
PyAudio did it.

PyAudio also needs to know this information to build its stream. In
the demo code, it uses `p.get_format_from_width(wf.getsampwidth())` to
get a [PortAudio format](http://portaudio.com/docs/v19-doxydocs/portaudio_8h.html#a4582d93c2c2e60e12be3d74c5fe00b96),
like `pyaudio.paInt16`. I cheated a bit, and added a mapping based on this:

{% highlight python %}
if pyaudio_format == pyaudio.paInt16:
    width = np.int16
else:
    sys.exit("add a mapping from this pyaudio format to numpy type")
...
np.fromstring(data, dtype=width)
{% endhighlight %}


### Part 3 (bonus): Rate, or how wide the uniform intervals are

At this point, I actually know enough to make my light blink. But for
completeness, let's talk about rate.

In Part 1, I got a list of amplitude measurements across 1,024
points. WAV doesn't store the x-values of all these points. Instead, it
notes the number of samples per second, or how wide those uniform
intervals are.

`wave` gives the number of samples per second with `wf.getframerate()`. My file was 22050.

# Empowered with knowledge, onward I go!

Back to my function:
{% highlight python %}
def do_something_with_the_light(chunk_data):
  data = np.fromstring(chunk_data, dtype=width)
{% endhighlight %}


Now I knew what data I was getting. It represented the sound with
1,024 int16 numbers that represented the amplitude of the waveform.
In the real world, it represented approximately 1/20th (or 1024/22050)
of a second of sound.

So I should be able to graph it!

![Graph of robot voice sound wave](/assets/2016-11-07-real.png)

Neat!

The last step is turning that wiggly line into how bright the LED
should be when playing this sound bite. A higher amplitude means the
sound was louder. I'm sure I could spend a lot of time on this (how do
humans perceive differences in loudness and brightness?), but instead,
I took the mean of the absolute value and scaled it to a percent for
the LED.

And it kind of looked okay! The light blinked along with the sound!

And I learned a tiny, tiny bit about audio file formats.


## See Also
* [The code](https://github.com/jessstringham/raspberrypi/blob/master/talking_led.py)
* [PyAudio](http://people.csail.mit.edu/hubert/pyaudio/) and [PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com)
* This is a more legit: [3D Spectrum Analyser](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vn39txtVIHc)
* Speaking of codecs, here's a cool post about [H.264](https://sidbala.com/h-264-is-magic/)
